How can we effectively determine the different sources of waste on pacific islands such as Saibai, and how can we best adjust the flow of waste through communities to divert waste away from landfill?

In order to fully understand the origins of waste on pacific islands, especially Saibai island, we first need to understand the context and challenges of proper waste management in remote areas, including, but not limited to, specific challenges associated with centralised waste collection and disposal, and the role geographic isolation plays in waste management practices and options. 

The geographic isolation of Saibai island and the lack of a developed economy means that there is a distinct lack of transportation infrastructure, resulting in the movement of waste being a costly and difficult endeavour. "...the logistics required to remove waste from the island and transport it to recycling/disposal facilities on the mainland can be extremely costly in their current form." (EWB Challenge, 2024) This is why, frequently, waste created is unlikely to end up far from the specific community which created it. This, coupled with the limited financial resources and lack of manpower in remote communities, proves many common solutions to waste management to be impractical on Saibai island. 

The need for effective, centralised waste management becomes evermore dire when the consequences of ineffective waste management are analysed, such as climate vulnerability, health risks, and technological limitations. 

According to the Torres Strait Island Planning Council, "... Saibai Island is currently subject to frequent inundation over parts of the community during highest tides. The extent and frequency of these events are likely to increase in the future with climate change... most of the larger vegetated areas are identified as a potential bushfire risk" (Torres Strait Island Planning Council, 2012). As such, the improper removal of waste could prove an environmental threat to the island of Saibai, with a natural disaster carrying the potential of contaminating the land with various forms of disease from the waste. These diseases could further spread to the population, causing sickness in the people of the island. 

It has been established that traditional means of waste management are not able to be implemented on Saibai island, so the job of researchers shift from determining how to effectively mimic western, developed waste management into designing custom solutions which are more likely to work specifically on small pacific island nations. This most often includes upcycling, which is a technique used to breathe new value into a product by transforming waste into art, furniture, or accessories. This, when combined with recycling, provides a good foundation to deal with a significant portion of waste on Saibai Island. 

Some of the forms of most common forms of waste found on the land of pacific island nations are ‘Ghost Nets’ and microplastics, which quite often wash up on the shores of these nations, exasperating their waste management problems creating significantly more waste for the people of Saibai to manage. 

Discarded fishing nets (often referred to as ‘Ghost Nets’) are discarded by fishers both in the local area, and the greater Pacific Ocean, which are carried by currents end up washed onto shores of islands such as Saibai. These nets have the potential of entangling natural sea life and causing a threat to the diversity of the environment. The people of Mystery Island have shown that these can be upcycled into material for creating artistic sculptures, baskets or mats, recycled into nylon pellets for the manufacturing of clothing, used in construction projects to reinforce concrete, and used to create eco-friendly and ‘green’ building materials. 

The same can be said for microplastics which end up on the shores of Saibai. Microplastics are tiny pieces of plastic which end up in the ocean, and break down very slowly into smaller pieces of plastics. These microplastics are hazardous to marine flora and fauna. Research has shown that these can be repurposed into new plastic products, transformed into fuel for machines and motor vehicles, and used as materials in local manufacturing or craft.

Another concern threatening the Saibai island is policies and regulations from government agencies. "Torres Strait has special biosecurity requirements for the southward movement of the following products between the Torres Strait Protected Zone to the Torres Strait Permanent Biosecurity Monitoring Zone, and any Torres Strait islands to mainland Australia. These high risk goods can only be moved if a permit is granted by the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry" (Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 2015.) Further, there are numerous changes needed to support recycling and upcycling. These include; policy alignment and integration, financial incentives and subsidies, capacity building and technical assistance, public awareness and education, stakeholder engagement and collaboration.

In conclusion, by identifying the sources of waste into a community, we can more effectively divert this waste away from landfill in developed countries, and by isolating specific sources, useful repurposing of this waste can be a more suitable alternative to traditional waste management in western countries. 

# References

EWB Challenge. (2024). Design area 1 – waste management. EWB Challenge | Design Area 1 – Waste management. https://ewbchallenge.org/challenge/saibai-island-tsirc/design-area-1-waste-management/

Junting Zhang a, a, b, c, Aghbashlo, M., Ahamed, A., Alibardi, L., Angelo, A. C. M., Arafat, H. A., Arena, U., Aryan, Y., Astrup, T. F., Atia, N. G., Bartolozzi, I., Berge, N. D., Schott, A. B. S., Bisinella, V., … Muench, S. (2021, March 10). Sustainable Municipal Waste Management Strategies Through Life Cycle Assessment Method: A Review. Journal of Environmental Management. [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0301479721003005?via%3Dihub](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0301479721003005?via%3Dihub)


Schioldann J, Søgaard I. Søren Kierkegaard (1813–55): a bicentennial pathographical review. History of Psychiatry. 2013;24(4):387-398. doi:[10.1177/0957154X13499863](https://doi.org/10.1177/0957154X13499863)

Moustakas, K., & Loizidou, M. (2018, October 25). Sustainable Waste Management - environmental science and Pollution Research. SpringerLink. [https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11356-018-3548-z](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11356-018-3548-z)

Australian Government. (2015). Moving goods to, from and within Torres Strait. Moving goods to, from and within Torres Strait - DAFF. [https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/policy/australia/naqs/moving-goods-torres-strait#moving-goods-from-png-to-the-torres-strait-protected-zone](https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/policy/australia/naqs/moving-goods-torres-strait#moving-goods-from-png-to-the-torres-strait-protected-zone)

N/A. (2024). Design area 1 – waste management. EWB Challenge | Design Area 1 – Waste management. https://ewbchallenge.org/challenge/saibai-island-tsirc/design-area-1-waste-management/